assignment/Readme.md, before:

## 2021/22 details on the assignment

*Visual information about faces and objects are processed in distinct cortical areas*. Discuss and present an analysis of a standard localiser experiment (based on functional magnetic resonance imaging data).

### Summary

Aim: demonstrate ability to perform GLM style analysis with a tool like `fsl` and write up the results in a journal-style essay. To produce figures, plots to show results and support your conclusions, you are allowed to rely on images and plots produced by `fsl` and your own replotted versions using `matlab` (+ any other tools you find useful).  


- 250w abstract
- plus a main document (max 1500w)
- keep introduction brief (max 400-500w)
- use a journal style presentation // you are free to decide stylistic details, but make sure you aim for uncluttered / direct style (rely use APA style guide, if in doubt)
- references / citations as for standard written work (these don't add to the wordcount)
- max. 5 figures illustrating details of the experimental setup, analysis methodology and results (figures can have sub-panels or subplots)

- you can use a github repository (preferred) or an Appendix (not included in word limit) to share examples of scripts, code, etc.

### FAQ

1. **Wordcount?** Please stick to the numbers. Many journals enforce hard limits at the submission stage (online form), so IRL you won't even be able to submit a piece if it doesn't meet the criteria.

2. **Wordcount/figure legends + references**. These don't add to the wordcount.

3. Submission is via moodle / turnitin so please also pay particular attention to how you reference and cite material.

4. Please submit one document (`pdf`, Word Doc, Open office, ...) and put figures inline as you would with any other essay / lab report.

5. **Which dataset(s) do I need to analyze?** You are welcome to analyze any of the datasets we collected, but I suggest you stick to the first fMRI data set from one or more participants (A, B, and/or C). The details of how the data were acquired and the stimulus code are available on the github page. In brief, the experiment was a `scene_localiser()` in which images of 3 different categories (faces, objects, and scenes) atlernated with a gray background screen. Participants performed a task (press a button if you see a grayscale [as opposed to a full colour] version of an image).

6. "What do you mean by sub-panels, sub-plots?" - see the [matlab script example `example_figure_making.m`](example_figure_making.m). There is still some tweaking to do, but hopefully a good starting point for everyone.

![example figure rendered from matlab](figureWithReasonableSize.png)

Inspect [the PDF file](figureWithReasonableSize.pdf) and think about whether you want to do some final touches with a tool like https://inkscape.org/en/

Commit message:

points students to moodle page

assignment/Readme.md, after:

## 2022/23 details on the assignment

Please refer to the moodle page for the module for any changes from previous years.

## 2021/22 details on the assignment

*Visual information about faces and objects are processed in distinct cortical areas*. Discuss and present an analysis of a standard localiser experiment (based on functional magnetic resonance imaging data).

### Summary

Aim: demonstrate ability to perform GLM style analysis with a tool like `fsl` and write up the results in a journal-style essay. To produce figures, plots to show results and support your conclusions, you are allowed to rely on images and plots produced by `fsl` and your own replotted versions using `matlab` (+ any other tools you find useful).  


- 250w abstract
- plus a main document (max 1500w)
- keep introduction brief (max 400-500w)
- use a journal style presentation // you are free to decide stylistic details, but make sure you aim for uncluttered / direct style (rely use APA style guide, if in doubt)
- references / citations as for standard written work (these don't add to the wordcount)
- max. 5 figures illustrating details of the experimental setup, analysis methodology and results (figures can have sub-panels or subplots)

- you can use a github repository (preferred) or an Appendix (not included in word limit) to share examples of scripts, code, etc.

### FAQ

1. **Wordcount?** Please stick to the numbers. Many journals enforce hard limits at the submission stage (online form), so IRL you won't even be able to submit a piece if it doesn't meet the criteria.

2. **Wordcount/figure legends + references**. These don't add to the wordcount.

3. Submission is via moodle / turnitin so please also pay particular attention to how you reference and cite material.

4. Please submit one document (`pdf`, Word Doc, Open office, ...) and put figures inline as you would with any other essay / lab report.

5. **Which dataset(s) do I need to analyze?** You are welcome to analyze any of the datasets we collected, but I suggest you stick to the first fMRI data set from one or more participants (A, B, and/or C). The details of how the data were acquired and the stimulus code are available on the github page. In brief, the experiment was a `scene_localiser()` in which images of 3 different categories (faces, objects, and scenes) atlernated with a gray background screen. Participants performed a task (press a button if you see a grayscale [as opposed to a full colour] version of an image).

6. "What do you mean by sub-panels, sub-plots?" - see the [matlab script example `example_figure_making.m`](example_figure_making.m). There is still some tweaking to do, but hopefully a good starting point for everyone.

![example figure rendered from matlab](figureWithReasonableSize.png)

Inspect [the PDF file](figureWithReasonableSize.pdf) and think about whether you want to do some final touches with a tool like https://inkscape.org/en/
