Introduction.md, before:

Data analysis for Neuroimaging - C84DAN
===
<!-- some directives for making things look a certain way -->
<!-- page_number: true -->

##### Denis Schluppeck

---

## What's the plan?

1. Acquire some functional MRI data in a simple, but real experiment
2. Analyze the data with ``fsl`` [(FMRIB webpage)](https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki)
3. Learn a bit about ``UNIX`` and version control
4. Use ``Matlab`` to inspect and visualise some data

---

## Setting up computers


---

## FSL analysis

- point & click version (like some of you have already done)
- digging into the details of how this is implemented
- inspecting analysis output, intermediate files, ...
---

## Some UNIX

- only basics are needed for running FSL analysis
- helpful for organising (any) research data
- pointer to more complex things (e.g. ``freesurfer``)

```bash
# navigate file system
# cd, ls, pwd, which, ...

# clone a repository
git clone
```


---

## Version control ``git``

- principles of using version control (``git``)
- create (free) github id and start working on a simple project
---

Commit message:

adds some details to intro session

Introduction.md, after:

Data analysis for Neuroimaging - C84DAN
===
<!-- some directives for making things look a certain way -->
<!-- page_number: true -->

##### Denis Schluppeck

---

## What's the plan?

1. Acquire some functional MRI data in a simple, but real experiment
2. Analyze the data with ``fsl`` [(FMRIB webpage)](https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki)
3. Learn a bit about ``UNIX`` and version control
4. Use ``Matlab`` to inspect and visualise some data

---

## Setting up computers

1. Need to run in Mac mode
2. Each user (at a particular machine) needs to make sure that ``Terminal/shell`` is set up correctly by copying a set-up file the first time they use that computer.
3. Quick reality check. Look at some existing data (anatomy, fMRI) with ``fslview``

### Todo

- [x] ``.bash_profile`` basic
- [ ] add in ``.git-completion`` script (and document)
- [ ] test in A5 lab on Macs.

---

## FSL analysis

- point & click version (like some of you have already done)
- digging into the details of how this is implemented
- inspecting analysis output, intermediate files, ...

---

## Some UNIX

- only basics are needed for running FSL analysis
- helpful for organising (any) research data
- pointer to more complex things (e.g. ``freesurfer``)

```bash
# navigate file system
# cd, ls, pwd, which, ...

# some powerful commands for organising your data

# some fun stuff for keeping you interested
```

---

## Version control ``git``

- 30min lecture on principles of using version control (``git``)
- create (free) github id and start working on a simple project
- make your first modifications to a local copy of code and get it into a repo.

---
