Readme.md, before:

# Notes for PSYG4043 - Data analysis for Neuroimaging

<img src="dafni-splash.png" width="80%"><br>

## Summary

These are the materials for a *data analysis for neuroimaging* module [PSYG4043] at the University of Nottingham, a core module on the *MSc Cognitive Neuroscience*.

In the class, we acquire various MRI data sets - (emphasis on fMRI, anatomical, and/or DTI) in small groups. We then use a combination of tools to analyse the data.

The module is for *10 credits* and runs for seven 2h sessions.


| Week | Unit                                                           | Topic                                                     |
| :--- | :------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1    | [Introduction](Introduction.md), [(HTML)](Introduction.html)   | Introduction, Administrivia, computers, ... (JJ, DS)      |
| 2    | [Getting data](gettingData.md)                      | Data acquisition (sessions on 3T)   (DS)          |
| 3a   | [Organising your data for SPM](organising-data.md)                     | Organising data for SPM analysis (folders, meta-data, etc)  (JJ)           |
| 3b   | [SPM analysis](spmAnalysis.md)                                 | Inspecting & analysing data: SPM                          |
| 4 (reading week!)   | [UNIX + git](unix-2-and-versions.md)                           | **self-paced, no class!** Version control, working in a UNIX environment (DS)              |
| 5    | [Visual display](visual-display.md)                            | Displaying fMRI results with different tools (JJ)         |
| 6    | [Making figures in Matlab](matlab-images.md)                  | Using Matlab to make publication-ready figures   (DS)     |
| 7    | [Wrap-up](wrap-up.md), [GLM/Timeseries](matlab-timeseries.md)                                           | Module wrap-up, Q&A and preparing for the assignment      (JJ) |

## Attendance monitoring

Reminder to use QR codes for attendance monitoring at UoN.

## Assignment

The coursework **assignment** is a short written report. For details, see the moodle page for this module. In brief:

- 250w abstract
- plus a main document (max 1500w)
- references / citations as for standard written work (these don't add to the wordcount)
- max. 5 figures illustrating details of the experimental setup, analysis methodology and results (figures can have sub-panels or subplots)

For more details have a look at [this page in the `assignment` folder](assignment/Readme.md).

---

## Links

- for reading: [Data analysis for Neuroimaging (web)](https://schluppeck.github.io/dafni/)
- for getting code and using!: [DAFNI Github repo](https://github.com/schluppeck/dafni/)

## Contacts (2024/25)

- **Jeyoung Jung**, jeyoung.jung@nottingham.ac.uk (module convenor)
- Denis Schluppeck

Commit message:

changes for 25/26 cohort - removing material from front-facing page.

Readme.md, after:

# Notes for PSYG4043 - Data analysis for Neuroimaging

<img src="dafni-splash.png" width="80%"><br>

## Summary

These pages contain some materials for a *data analysis for neuroimaging* module [PSYG4043] at the University of Nottingham, a core module on the *MSc Cognitive Neuroscience*.

In the class, we acquire various MRI data sets - (emphasis on fMRI, anatomical, and/or DTI) in small groups. We then use a combination of tools to analyse the data.

The materials for the module are hosted on the Moodle pages for the module, but for the scanning / data acquisition days and for code examples, we use this github repository:

| Week | Unit                                                           | Topic                                                     |
| :--- | :------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2    | [Getting data](gettingData.md)                      | Data acquisition (sessions on 3T)   (DS)          |
| 4 (reading week!)   | [UNIX + git](unix-2-and-versions.md)                           | **self-paced, no class!** Version control, working in a UNIX environment (DS)              |
| 6    | [Making figures in Matlab](matlab-images.md)                  | Using Matlab to make publication-ready figures   (DS)     |


---

## Links

- for reading: [Data analysis for Neuroimaging (web)](https://schluppeck.github.io/dafni/)
- for getting code and using!: [DAFNI Github repo](https://github.com/schluppeck/dafni/)

## Contacts (2025/26

- **Jeyoung Jung**, jeyoung.jung@nottingham.ac.uk (module convenor)
- Denis Schluppeck
