unix-2-and-versions.md, before:

# UNIX

<img src="BASH_logo-transparent-bg-bw.png" width="40%">

Some more details on how to use features of UNIX/bash that are particularly helpful for organising and processing data.

The people who make ``fsl`` have produced [a collection of short videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLvgasosJnUVnnFifxecbyEno7jnqrl8fQ) that introduce some UNIX commands that are particularly helpful for running an FMRI data analysis with their tools.

For background, there is [a really good online tutorial](https://www.ee.surrey.ac.uk/Teaching/Unix/) hosted at EE at University of Surrey. The terminal / shell.

You can also have a look at the brief online course at [Software Carpentry](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/reference), which looks really good.


## Some basics

- only basics are needed for running FSL analysis
- lots of functionality is available through point-and-click
- **but** command line is helpful for organising (any) research data
- more complex analysis, e.g. ``freesurfer``, require some working knowledge



## Version control, ``git``

<img src="Git-Logo-2Color.png" width="40%">

Some really useful background is available in some brief videos produced by https://github.com

### What is version control?

A really clear video explaing this in simple terms [What is version control?](https://git-scm.com/video/what-is-version-control)

### What is ``git``

Have a look at the video on [What is ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/what-is-git)

### Get going with ``git``

Finally, you can actually [Get going with ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/get-going), in particular check out  
  ``1:13min`` for configuring ``user.name`` and ``user.email`` - keeping in mind you'll probably want to use a value for ``user.email`` that is your generic / non-university e-mail.

We don't actually need to install this in the computer labs - but on your personal machines you might have to do this. You can use ``which git`` in the Terminal. If you get a valid path back, then you know it's installed. You could also try ``git --version`` to find out which version you have installed on your machine.




### Git basics

A slightly deeper look at ``git`` in the video about [quick wins with ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/quick-wins)

Commit message:

adds links to md and pdf version of VCS presentation

unix-2-and-versions.md, after:

# UNIX

<img src="BASH_logo-transparent-bg-bw.png" width="40%">

Some more details on how to use features of UNIX/bash that are particularly helpful for organising and processing data.

The people who make ``fsl`` have produced [a collection of short videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLvgasosJnUVnnFifxecbyEno7jnqrl8fQ) that introduce some UNIX commands that are particularly helpful for running an FMRI data analysis with their tools.

For background, there is [a really good online tutorial](https://www.ee.surrey.ac.uk/Teaching/Unix/) hosted at EE at University of Surrey. The terminal / shell.

You can also have a look at the brief online course at [Software Carpentry](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/reference), which looks really good.


## Some basics

- only basics are needed for running FSL analysis
- lots of functionality is available through point-and-click
- **but** command line is helpful for organising (any) research data
- more complex analysis, e.g. ``freesurfer``, require some working knowledge



## Version control, ``git``

<img src="Git-Logo-2Color.png" width="40%">

My (very brief) presentation on version control with git [as a markdown file](./version-control.md) or [as PDF](./version-control.pdf). This is what's covered in the lab class.
 

Some really useful background is available in some brief videos produced by https://github.com

### What is version control?

A really clear video explaing this in simple terms [What is version control?](https://git-scm.com/video/what-is-version-control)

### What is ``git``

Have a look at the video on [What is ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/what-is-git)

### Get going with ``git``

Finally, you can actually [Get going with ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/get-going), in particular check out  
  ``1:13min`` for configuring ``user.name`` and ``user.email`` - keeping in mind you'll probably want to use a value for ``user.email`` that is your generic / non-university e-mail.

We don't actually need to install this in the computer labs - but on your personal machines you might have to do this. You can use ``which git`` in the Terminal. If you get a valid path back, then you know it's installed. You could also try ``git --version`` to find out which version you have installed on your machine.




### Git basics

A slightly deeper look at ``git`` in the video about [quick wins with ``git``](https://git-scm.com/video/quick-wins)
