matlab_images/Readme.md, before:

# Brain images in Matlab

The aims of this lesson are:

  - refresh your memory about ``matlab``
  - see how to load ``nifti`` images (pre-2017b we need a toolbox, [now support is native](https://uk.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/niftiread.html)). See the first exercise below.
  - we complete a simple interactive viewer program for displaying 3d (or even 4d) imaging data. **We need to write a function** ``returnSlice()``
  - thinking about putting your code under version control!

Matlab has powerful functions / toolboxes to make working with images and multi-dimensional arrays quite straightforward and I hope I'll be able to show you that in less than 50-100 lines of code you can build a pretty cool little utility. Building the whole thing from scratch takes a bit more than a couple of sessions, so the aim here is to concentrate on a couple of key functions

## Reading images into ``matlab``

### paths, etc

Make sure that the ``mrTools`` toolbox is on the path:

```Matlab
addpath(genpath('/Volumes/practicals/ds1/mrTools'))

which mlrImageReadNifti
% should return a valid path!
```

### now load and display image:

```matlab
% try out  - make sure you have ; at end of line
[data hdr] = mlrImageReadNifti('path_to_3d_testfile.nii');

% then manipulate in matlab
```

Good commands to play around with are ``image``, ``imagesc``, ...

## Background: specification for image viewer

The user starts the program from the Matlab command line by typing ``sliceview()``, which then automatically loads in an image from a file in the current folder. By default, the program then opens a figure window, selects a 2d slice half-way through the 3d image in a particular orientation and displays it as a grayscale image (with a color scheme/range that stays fixed) and a colorbar to show how image intensities map to colors.

- When users press the up-arrow key, the image viewer skips to the next slice. Down-arrow for the previous slice. There is a white text label in the top left corner of the image that displays the current slice number

- When the user presses 'o', the the orientation in which the 3d image is "sliced" changes: sagittal -> horizontal -> coronal -> ...

- When the user presses 'q' (or the Escape key), the the figure window is closed.

- Help: The program also provides simple help on the command line, reminding the user what buttons to press to skip through slices, to change orientation, and to quit:

```text
==============================================
 Press the following buttons to:
up/down change slice
o/O change orientation
c/C change cursor
q/Esc quit
==============================================
```

## Data (version 1.0)

For the viewer program we are tyring to complete, the image to be displayed in stored in a MAT file called ``anatomy.mat`` in the current folder The MAT file contains two variables:

- one called ``array``, a 3d-array containing the image volume;
- another variable called ``hdr``, a ``struct`` with many fields, containing information about the stored image, including the filename of the original image, image dimensions, voxel sizes, etc.

![Picture of image viewer](./figure_sliceview.png)

## Data (version 2.0)


## Helpful commands / concepts

The following information should help tackle the problem:

- each figure (handle) comes with a field called "UserData", which you can use to "attach" data to the figure

- the "KeyPressFcn" field of the figure
- the idea of *callback functions* and figure handles (explained in lecture)
- ``struct`` for keeping multiple disparate bits of information together
- ``imagesc``, ``min/max`` (or ``prctile``), ``colorbar``, ``squeeze``




## Aim: a function ``returnSlice()``
We are trying to complete the ``sliceview()`` program so that it can work like the solution I have provided. In order to get this to work, you'll need to write a function called ``returnSlice()`` that does the following:

```matlab
s = returnSlice(array, sliceNum, orientation)
```

- ``s`` should be a 2d array (a slice)
- ``sliceNum`` is the slice we want to get out in
- ``orientation`` (1, 2, or 3 for now)

What are the things to worry about / check to make sure this function is robust and does the right thing?


## Data (version 2.0) + version control

### Loading in ``nifti`` files

Look at the code in ``sliceview.m`` at the start:

```Matlab
% load a data file
try
    load('anatomy.mat') % which provides 'array' and 'hdr' variables
catch
    error('Cannot find file anatomy.mat - please make sure it is present in current folder')
end

% hdr contains information, the HEADER
% array contains the actual image data to be passed to the Figure / owner
```

Using the function ``mlrImageReadNifti()`` and an input argument to `sliceview()` - change the functionality such that you can provide the path to a ``nifti`` file and that dataset will be loaded in instead.

- Do you need to worry about whether the data is 3d or 4d? For starters, assume that the user is doing something reasonable... but next, what if not?

### Version control

Now that you have figured out the logic of what needs to happen. You can start adding files (make a copy!) to your **github repository** and adding/committing the changes. Try to

- add only code (not data)
- make your code self-contained to that folder (no dependencies to files in other locations... with the exception of the ``mlrImageReadNifti...()`` functions and colleagues)
- make "atomic" commits (small additions at a time not many changes in one go)
- add useful commit messages
- after you have ``commit``ed some changes, also ``git push`` to github.com


## Notes

- check the ``interact.m`` program to see how we can attach interactivity to the matlab figure window
- ``sliceview.m`` is the nearly complete program... all it's missing is the functionality of ``returnSlice()`` - you can either provide this as a separate file (the way you are probably used to) or inside the ``sliceview.m`` file itself.     


## Future features (things to think about)

- if the image is not a neat cube (but, say, has dimensions 176x256x256, what's a potential problem of switching orientations?)
- specifying a data file name as an input argument
- allowing the user to pass in a file name or an actual 3d array of data
- allowing the user to pass in a 4d array (functional MRI data) and displaying a particular time point
- adding functionality with mouse-clicks: when the user clicks on a voxel, some information is displayed in the command line

Commit message:

solution to pimping of sliceview.m - to accept nifti files

matlab_images/Readme.md, after:

# Brain images in Matlab

The aims of this lesson are:

  - refresh your memory about ``matlab``
  - see how to load ``nifti`` images (pre-2017b we need a toolbox, [now support is native](https://uk.mathworks.com/help/images/ref/niftiread.html)). See the first exercise below.
  - we complete a simple interactive viewer program for displaying 3d (or even 4d) imaging data. **We need to write a function** ``returnSlice()``
  - thinking about putting your code under version control!

Matlab has powerful functions / toolboxes to make working with images and multi-dimensional arrays quite straightforward and I hope I'll be able to show you that in less than 50-100 lines of code you can build a pretty cool little utility. Building the whole thing from scratch takes a bit more than a couple of sessions, so the aim here is to concentrate on a couple of key functions

## Reading images into ``matlab``

### paths, etc

Make sure that the ``mrTools`` toolbox is on the path:

```Matlab
addpath(genpath('/Volumes/practicals/ds1/mrTools'))

which mlrImageReadNifti
% should return a valid path!
```

### now load and display image:

```matlab
% try out  - make sure you have ; at end of line
[data hdr] = mlrImageReadNifti('path_to_3d_testfile.nii');

% then manipulate in matlab
```

Good commands to play around with are ``image``, ``imagesc``, ...

## Background: specification for image viewer

The user starts the program from the Matlab command line by typing ``sliceview()``, which then automatically loads in an image from a file in the current folder. By default, the program then opens a figure window, selects a 2d slice half-way through the 3d image in a particular orientation and displays it as a grayscale image (with a color scheme/range that stays fixed) and a colorbar to show how image intensities map to colors.

- When users press the up-arrow key, the image viewer skips to the next slice. Down-arrow for the previous slice. There is a white text label in the top left corner of the image that displays the current slice number

- When the user presses 'o', the the orientation in which the 3d image is "sliced" changes: sagittal -> horizontal -> coronal -> ...

- When the user presses 'q' (or the Escape key), the the figure window is closed.

- Help: The program also provides simple help on the command line, reminding the user what buttons to press to skip through slices, to change orientation, and to quit:

```text
==============================================
 Press the following buttons to:
up/down change slice
o/O change orientation
c/C change cursor
q/Esc quit
==============================================
```

## Data (version 1.0)

For the viewer program we are tyring to complete, the image to be displayed in stored in a MAT file called ``anatomy.mat`` in the current folder The MAT file contains two variables:

- one called ``array``, a 3d-array containing the image volume;
- another variable called ``hdr``, a ``struct`` with many fields, containing information about the stored image, including the filename of the original image, image dimensions, voxel sizes, etc.

![Picture of image viewer](./figure_sliceview.png)

## Data (version 2.0)


## Helpful commands / concepts

The following information should help tackle the problem:

- each figure (handle) comes with a field called "UserData", which you can use to "attach" data to the figure

- the "KeyPressFcn" field of the figure
- the idea of *callback functions* and figure handles (explained in lecture)
- ``struct`` for keeping multiple disparate bits of information together
- ``imagesc``, ``min/max`` (or ``prctile``), ``colorbar``, ``squeeze``




## Aim: a function ``returnSlice()``
We are trying to complete the ``sliceview()`` program so that it can work like the solution I have provided. In order to get this to work, you'll need to write a function called ``returnSlice()`` that does the following:

```matlab
s = returnSlice(array, sliceNum, orientation)
```

- ``s`` should be a 2d array (a slice)
- ``sliceNum`` is the slice we want to get out in
- ``orientation`` (1, 2, or 3 for now)

What are the things to worry about / check to make sure this function is robust and does the right thing?


## Data (version 2.0) + version control

### Loading in ``nifti`` files

Look at the code in ``sliceview.m`` at the start:

```Matlab
% load a data file
try
    load('anatomy.mat') % which provides 'array' and 'hdr' variables
catch
    error('Cannot find file anatomy.mat - please make sure it is present in current folder')
end

% hdr contains information, the HEADER
% array contains the actual image data to be passed to the Figure / owner
```

Using the function ``mlrImageReadNifti()`` and an input argument to `sliceview()` - change the functionality such that you can provide the path to a ``nifti`` file and that dataset will be loaded in instead.

- Do you need to worry about whether the data is 3d or 4d? For starters, assume that the user is doing something reasonable... but next, what if not?

>The solution to this problem is available via [this page](sliceviewplus.md). But give it a serious attempt first before looking at the solution.

### Version control

Now that you have figured out the logic of what needs to happen. You can start adding files (make a copy!) to your **github repository** and adding/committing the changes. Try to

- add only code (not data)
- make your code self-contained to that folder (no dependencies to files in other locations... with the exception of the ``mlrImageReadNifti...()`` functions and colleagues)
- make "atomic" commits (small additions at a time not many changes in one go)
- add useful commit messages
- after you have ``commit``ed some changes, also ``git push`` to github.com


## Notes

- check the ``interact.m`` program to see how we can attach interactivity to the matlab figure window
- ``sliceview.m`` is the nearly complete program... all it's missing is the functionality of ``returnSlice()`` - you can either provide this as a separate file (the way you are probably used to) or inside the ``sliceview.m`` file itself.     


## Future features (things to think about)

- if the image is not a neat cube (but, say, has dimensions 176x256x256, what's a potential problem of switching orientations?)
- specifying a data file name as an input argument
- allowing the user to pass in a file name or an actual 3d array of data
- allowing the user to pass in a 4d array (functional MRI data) and displaying a particular time point
- adding functionality with mouse-clicks: when the user clicks on a voxel, some information is displayed in the command line
